>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, AUGUST 3RD...
ISRAEL BEGINS A LARGE SCALE
WITHDRAWAL OF TROOPS FROM GAZA,
BUT THE CONFLICT CONTINUES.
HOW BOTH SIDES ARE FIGHTING IT
OUT ON THE SOCIAL MEDIA
BATTLEFIELD.
>> THE CONTEST FOR WORLD
OPINION ON NUMEROUS LEVELS,
CERTAINLY THE GOVERNMENTS ARE
WAGING THAT CONTEST.
>> Sreenivasan: AND ISLAMIC
JIHADISTS MAKE IMPORTANT NEW
GAINS IN IRAQ.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
IN LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING,
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
ISRAEL TODAY BEGAN A MAJOR
WITHDRAWAL OF ITS GROUND TROOPS
FROM GAZA BUT ITS SHELLING OF
HAMAS TARGETS THERE CONTINUES.
ONE ATTACK THERE TODAY KILLED
TEN PEOPLE AT A U.N. SCHOOL
PROMPTING CONDEMNATION FROM
A UN OFFICIAL WHO WAS ASKED
WHETHER HAMAS IS USING CHILDREN
AT HUMAN SHIELDS.
>> YES THERE ARE CERTAINLY
BEHAVIORS THAT EXPOSE THE
POPULATION ON THE GROUND BY
MILITANT GROUPS THAT OPERATE
CLOSE TO CIVILIAN PREMISES, BUT
CERTAINLY IF YOU LOOK AT THE
EXTENT OF THE DAMAGE, THE EXTENT
OF THE PHYSICAL DESTRUCTION BUT
ALSO THE EXTENT OF THE LOSS OF
HUMAN LIFE-- AND I WITNESSED
THAT MYSELF VISITING THIS WEEK
THE PEDIATRIC WARD IN THE MAIN
HOSPITAL IN GAZA-- SEEING THE
BROKEN BODIES OF THE CHILDREN
THERE, THERE IS NO DOUBT IN MY
MIND WHATSOEVER THAT
INSUFFICIENT MEASURES OF
PRECAUTION AND CONTROL AND
PROTECTION ARE BEING TAKEN
INCLUDING BY THE ISRAELI
DEFENSE FORCE WHEN ENGAGING IN
GAZA.
>> Sreenivasan: THE STATE
DEPARTMENT ALSO WAS UNUSUALLY
BLUNT IN ITS CRITICISM OF
ISRAEL, SAYING THE UNITED STATES
WAS APPALLED BY THE ATTACK,
WHICH IT CALLED DISGRACEFUL.
IT ADDED ISRAEL MUST DO MORE TO
MEET ITS OWN STANDARDS AND AVOID
CIVILIAN CASUALTIES.
FOR MORE ABOUT THE CONFLICT WE
ARE JOINED ONCE AGAIN TONIGHT
VIA SKYPE FROM JERUSALEM BY
JOSEF FEDERMAN OF THE ASSOCIATED
PRESS.
>> FIRST LET'S TALK ABOUT
WITHDRAWAL OF ISRAELI TROOPS IS
HAPPENING AND HAPPENING MORE
THAN IT WAS YESTERDAY.
>> THE ISRAELI ARMY CONFIRMED
THEY ALREADY PULLED OUT THE
BULK, THE MAJORITY OF THE GROUND
TROOPS THAT WERE IN GAZA, THEY
STILL HAVE A LIMITED PRESENCE
THERE, BUT THE IDEA IS TO TRY TO
FIND A WAY TO WIND DOWN THIS
OPERATION.
THEY WON'T GIVE ANY FIRM
NUMBERS, BUT WE CAN SEE WITH OUR
OWN EYES WE HAVE REPORTERS ALONG
THE BORDER WE HAVE ARMED,
ARMORED VEHICLES LEAVING
CROSSING BACK INTO THE BORDER
AND BEING TAKEN AWAY BY TRUCKS,
WE SAW SOLDIERS AND TANKS
WALKING AWAY FROM THEIR TANKS,
ROLLING UP THEIR BELONGINGS AND
THINGS SO THERE DEFINITELY SEEM
TO BE SIGNS ISRAEL IS ENTERING A
NEW PHASE, WHETHER THIS ACTUALLY
BRINGS AN TONED THE FIGHTING I
THINK THAT WILL TAKE A FEW MORE
DAYS.
>> IS THE ISRAELI WITHDRAWAL
BECAUSE THEY ARE STAFFED WITH
THE DESTRUCTION OF THE TUNNELS?
>> EXACTLY.
WHAT THE ARMY TOLD ME IS THEY
THINK THEY HAVE LOCATED I THINK
OVER 30 OF THESE TUNNELS, A
NETWORK THAT REACHED THE BORDER
AND WENT UNDERGROUND INTO ISRAEL
IN MANY CASES.
THEY HE THEY FOUND THE VAST
MAJORITY TO THE TUNNELS AND HIT
THE SYSTEM HARD, SO THEY DON'T
NEED TO HAVE THAT GROUND
PRESENCE IN THERE.
WHAT I THINK YOU MAY SEE IN THE
NEXT FEW DAYS, AGAIN, DEPENDING
ON HOW HAMAS REACTS IF THE
ROCKETS CONTINUE TO FLY, ISRAEL
IS GOING TO RESPOND MOST LIKELY
THROUGH AIR STRIKES OR MAYBE
ARTILLERY FIRE FROM THE ISRAELI
SIDE OF THE BORDER, BUT YOU ARE
NOT GOING TO SEE THE HEAVY
GROUND FIGHT YOU HAVE SEEN OVER
THE PAST FEW WEEKS.
>> IN THE MEANTIME THERE WAS A
PRETTY LARGE FUNERAL FOR THE
LIEUTENANT THAT WAS DECLARED
MISSING IN YESTERDAY AND
DECLARED DEAD.
>> YES, ABOUT 15,000 PEOPLE
ARRIVED AT THE FUNERAL, IT IS
STILL GOING ON, AS FAR AS I
KNOW.
>> IN THE MOST RECENT UPDATE WE
HAD IN TERMS OF THE U.N. SCHOOL
THAT WAS HIT AGAIN, ANY DETAILS
ON THAT?
>> THE SCHOOL, THE FRONT GATE OF
THE SCHOOL WAS HIT EARLY THIS
MORNING ON THE, IT SOUNDED LIKE
A PRETTY BAD ATTACK BECAUSE A
NUMBER OF PEOPLE WERE OUTSIDE
ACCEPTING FOOD RATIONS, PEOPLE
HAD BEEN SEEKING SHELTER THERE
AND HAPPENED RIGHT AT THAT TIME,
AT LEAST TEN PEOPLE, ALSO CIVIL,
ALL CIVILIANS WERE KILLED, 35
PEOPLE WERE WOUNDED THIS IS
PROBABLY THE SIXTH OR SEVENTH
TIME SOMETHING LIKE THIS HAS
HAPPENED, AND THE U.N. ONCE
AGAIN IS BLAMING ISRAEL, SAYS IT
WAS ISRAELI FIRE.
>> HAS THE SENTIMENT ON THE SORT
OF THE ISRAELI STREET CHANGED AT
ALL IN THE PAST FEW WEEKS NOW?
IT HAS BEEN FOUR OR FIVE WEEKS
WE ARE INTO THIS CONFLICT?
>> NO, IT IS REALLY STRIKING TO
ME HOW WIDESPREAD THE SUPPORT
SEEMS TO BE, I THINK ONE POLL
RECENTLY SAID SOMETHING LIKE
95 PERCENT OF THE POPULATION,
THE JEWISH POPULATION SUPPORTS
THIS OPERATION, THERE REALLY
SEEMS TO BE WALL-TO-WALL SUPPORT
AND BELIEF THAT, YOU KNOW, THE
GOAL OF THE OPERATION TO HALT
ROCKET ATTACKS, TO STRIKE AT
TUNNELS THAT ARE BEING DUG ALONG
THE BORDER INTO ISRAEL IS A
NOBLE GOAL AND JUSTIFIED AND I
DON'T SEE THAT SOFTENING MY TIME
SOON.
>> WHAT ABOUT THE OTHER SIDE?
WHAT IS HAPPENING ON THE SORT OF
STREETS OF GAZA RIGHT NOW?
>> WELL, THE PEOPLE OF GAZA AND
THE LEADERS OF GAZA, HAMAS
LEADERS ALSO BELIEVE THAT WHAT
THEY ARE DOING IS JUSTIFIED,
THEY FEEL THAT THEY ARE
DEFENDING THEMSELVES NOT ONLY
AGAINST ISRAELI ATTACKS BUT
AGAINST THE ISRAELI BLOCKADE,
THIS BLOCKADE THAT WAS IMPOSED
BACK IN 2006, 2007 WHEN HAMAS
FIRST CAME TO POWER, THE
BLOCKADE IS REALLY STIFLED THE
ECONOMY THERE, THERE ARE
SHORTAGE, IT IS HARD -- THE
UNEMPLOYMENT IS VERY HIGH AND
HAMAS IS SAYING FOR THIS
FIGHTING TO END THEY WANT AN END
TO THIS BLOCKADE AS WELL.
>> JOSEF FEDERMAN OF THE
ASSOCIATED PRESS JOINING US LIVE
FROM SKYPE IN JERUSALEM, THANK
YOU VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: TURNING NOW TO
ANOTHER TROUBLE SPOT-- IRAQ--
WHERE ISLAMIC JIHADISTS, WHO
RECENTLY SEIZED LARGE PARTS OF
THE NORTH AND WEST OF THE
COUNTRY, ARE REPORTED TO HAVE
MADE NEW IMPORTANT GAINS.
FOR THE LATEST FROM IRAQ, WE ARE
JOINED NOW FROM BAGHDAD VIA
SKYPE BY NOUR MALAS OF THE WALL
STREET JOURNAL.
>> FIRST OF ALL, HOW SIGNIFICANT
WAS THE CAPTURE OF THESE TOWNS?
>> IT IS QUITE SIGNIFICANT,
BECAUSE SIPS THE ISLAMIC STATE
STARTED ITS OFFENSIVE IN THE
NORTH IN JUNE THIS IS THE FIRST
TIME THEY HAVE BEEN ABLE TO
SEIZE ANY SIGNIFICANT TERRITORY,
THE SITUATION IS STILL FLUID UP
THERE, BUT THEY SEIZED THESE
TOWNS AND TWO SMALL OIL FIELDS
AND IN ANOTHER TOWN ARE JUST
HUNDREDS OF PEOPLE, PARTICULARLY
FROM THE YAZIDI RELIGIOUS
ETHNOCOMMUNITY SO THERE IS A
BUDDING HUMANITARIAN CRISIS
THERE AND ALSO CALLS INTO
QUESTION THE STRENGTH OF THE
FORCES THAT HAVE REALLY BEEN ONE
OF THE FIRST LINES OF DEFENSE IN
IRAQ AGAINST THE INSURGENTS.
>> ALSO HEARD THERE MIGHT HAVE
BEEN A DAM THAT WAS TAKEN OVER,
IS THERE A CONSEQUENCE TO THAT?
>> ABSOLUTELY, THAT SITUATION IS
ALSO VERY FLUID, IT IS NOT CLEAR
AT ALL, BUT THE ISLAMIC STATE
HAVE ACTUALLY TAKEN OVER THE DAM
WHICH IS THE COUNTRY'S LARGEST.
WE HAVE SPOKEN TO SOME PEOPLE
SAY PESHAWAR FIGHTERS ARE UNTIL
I DON'T HAVE THIS BUT THE
CONSEQUENCES WOULD BE HUGE FOR
THIS, THEY COULD FLOOD, IT MAY
EVEN AFFECT POWER SUPPLIES, WE
HAVE SEEN THE STRUGGLE FOR
RESOURCES AND INFRASTRUCTURE
LIKE ELECTRICITY AND POWER PLAY
OUT BETWEEN REBELS AND THE
REGIME IN SYRIA AS WELL AND OVER
THERE THE ISLAMIC STATE HAS BEEN
PRETTY SUCCESSFUL IN DOING THAT
SO DEFINITELY THAT IS A KEY AREA
OF CONCERN HERE.
>> EARLIER THIS WEEK WE SAW
STORIES COMING OUT OF MOSUL, A
CITY THAT ISIS NOW CONTROLS, THE
CHRISTIANS WERE PUSHING BACK
BECAUSE OF THE DESTRUCTION OR A
SERIES OF DESTRUCTION OF
SHRINES.
>> UNFORTUNATELY THEY ARE
PUSHING BACK AS MUCH AS THEY ARE
JUST FLEEING THE PROVINCE, IN
MANY CASES FLEEING IRAQ ALL
TOGETHER IF THEY CAN, THE
DESTRUCTION OF A RELIGIOUS
SHRINE, NOT JUST FOR CHRISTIANS
BUT MUSLIMS OF ALL SECRETARY
SECRETARY, SECRETARY SECONDS.
>> SECTS IS STARTING NOW A TEST
GROUND FOR WHETHER LOCAL
RESIDENTS ARE GOING TO START A
BACKLASH AGAINST THESE
INSURGENTS, BECAUSE THEY ARE
TOUCHING THE PARTS OF THEIR
TERRITORY AND HISTORY THAT ARE
SO SACRED AND SHARED BY ALL
SECOND SECRETARIES HERE.
>> WHAT SHRINES HAVE BEEN
DESTROYED?
>> THERE WAS A MAJOR MOSQUE ..
AND SHRINE SAYS TO CONTAIN THE
TOMB OF JONAH, A PROPHET,
IMPORTANT TO ALL RELIGIONS AND
THEY BLEW THAT UP LAST WEEK.
THEY ALSO HAVE ATTACKED SHIITE
RELIGIOUS SHRINES AND IN THIS
LATEST INCIDENT IN THE NORTHWEST
WE ARE SEEING THEM ATTACK OTHER
SHRINES, SO THERE IS REALLY
OFFENSE ON THE CULTURE THAT IS
ELECTRIFYING THE RESIDENTS OF
THE NORTH, NO MATTER HOW THEY
ACTUALLY FEEL ABOUT, YOU KNOW,
THE MILITARY SIDE OF THINGS,
THEY FEEL THERE IS JUST AN
UNACCEPTABLE ENCROACHMENT ON
THEIR HISTORY AND THEIR SHARED
HERITAGE.
>> WELL, WHAT IS THE IRAQI
GOVERNMENT RESPONSE TO ALL OF
THIS? HAS THEY JUST BEEN
LETTING THIS HAPPEN?
>> ABSOLUTELY NOT THEY HAVE
LAUNCHED A WIDE SCALE MILITARY
OFFENSIVE, AROUND TIKRIT TO PUSH
BACK THE ISLAMIC STATE THERE,
THEY ARE USING AERIAL
BOMBARDMENT, IN SOME CASES THEY
ARE SORT OF COUNTING ON THIS
LOCAL BACKLASH, HOPING THAT THE
ISLAMIC STATE REALLY CAN'T PLANT
ROOTS AND LOCAL RESIDENT WILL
START TO TURN AGAINST THEM,
INCLUDING TRIBESMEN, QUOTING
LOCAL SOURCES THAN THE MEANTIME
IRAQI FORCES ARE TRYING TO
REGROUP AND STRENGTHEN THEIR
FOCUS ON HOLDING THE KEY CITIES
AND MAKING SURE THAT THE
INSURGENTS DON'T PUSH SOUTHWARDS
TOWARD THE CAPITAL.
>> ALL RIGHT, NOUR MALAS OF THE
WALL STREET JOURNAL, JOINING US
VIA SKYPE, THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: IN BRITAIN,
CHURCH OF ENGLAND OFFICIALS ARE
CALLING ON PRIME MINISTER DAVID
CAMERON TO OFFER SANCTUARY TO
THOUSANDS OF IRAQI CHRISTIANS
WHO HAVE FLED NORTHERN IRAQ
FOLLOWING THE JIHADISTS'
MILITARY GAINS.
THE RIGHT REVEREND DAVID WALKER
TOLD THE OBSERVER NEWSPAPER THAT
THE COST TO THE UK WOULD BE
MINISCULE COMPARED TO WHAT
BRITAIN SPENT ON THE WAR IN
IRAQ.
HE SAYS THE UK NOW HAS A MORAL
DUTY TO HELP.
IN AUSTRALIA TODAY, 1,500 PEOPLE
ATTENDED A MEMORIAL SERVICE FOR
THREE OF THE YOUNGEST VICTIMS
WHO WERE TRAVELING ON MALAYSIA
AIRLINER 17.
THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION SAYS
THE PLANE CARRYING 298 PEOPLE
WAS BROUGHT DOWN BY A MISSILE
FIRED BY PRO-RUSSIAN
SEPARATISTS.
THE CHILDREN'S GRIEVING MOTHER
SPOKE AT THE SERVICE.
>> WHEN THEIR INNOCENT BODIES
WERE SHOT OUT OF THE SKY, I
STRETCHED MY ARMS AS HIGH AS I
COULD AND SCREAMED FOR THEM.
>> Sreenivasan: THE CHAIRMAN OF
THE HOUSE INTELLIGENCE
COMMITTEE, MICHIGAN REPUBLICAN
MIKE ROGERS, SAID TODAY THE
RECENT SURGE IN ILLEGAL
IMMIGRATION ONCE AGAIN EXPOSES
AMERICA'S VULNERABILITY TO
TERRORISTS HOPING TO ENTER THE
UNITED STATES FROM MEXICO.
>> WE NOTICED A VERY DANGEROUS
TREND A FEW YEARS AGO WHEN THE
IRANIAN KUDS FORCE-- AN EXTERNAL
TERRORIST GROUP IF YOU WILL
SUPPORTED BY THE COUNTRY OF
IRAN-- WAS PLANNING AN OPERATION
TO USE THE SOUTHERN BORDER TO
INFILTRATE PEOPLE INTO THE
UNITED STATES TO KILL THE SAUDI
AMBASSADOR.
SO CLEARLY OUR ENEMIES AND
ADVERSARIES UNDERSTAND THAT IT
IS A WEAKNESS.
>> Sreenivasan: FOR A SECOND
STRAIGHT DAY, UP TO HALF A
MILLION PEOPLE IN AND AROUND
TOLEDO, OHIO, STILL CANNOT
SAFELY DRINK THEIR TAP WATER.
THE CITY'S MAYOR SAID THE WATER
QUALITY IS IMPROVING BUT THAT IT
IS STILL CONSIDERED TOXIC.
PARENTS WERE ALSO ADVISED NOT TO
BATHE THEIR CHILDREN IN IT.
THE PROBLEM APPARENTLY STEMS
FROM ALGAE BLOOMS IN NEARBY LAKE
ERIE.
BOTTLED WATER IS RUNNING VERY
LOW IN SUPERMARKETS, BUT IS
BEING TRANSPORTED TO THE AREA BY
STATE AUTHORITIES AND THE
NATIONAL GUARD.
IN CALIFORNIA THIS WEEKEND,
GOVERNOR JERRY BROWN DECLARED A
STATE OF EMERGENCY AS A WILDFIRE
RAGED ALONG THE CALIFORNIA-
OREGON BORDER.
IT'S ONE OF MORE THAN A DOZEN
BURNING AROUND THE STATE, ALL OF
THEM MADE WORSE BY THE LINGERING
DROUGHT THERE.
SEVERAL HOMES THROUGHOUT THE
STATE HAVE BEEN DESTROYED AND
SEVERAL COMMUNITIES EVACUATED.
STARTING TUESDAY NEW FOOD AND
DRUG ADMINISTRATION RULES WILL
LIMIT HOW MUCH GLUTEN CAN BE IN
PRODUCTS LABELED AS GLUTEN FREE.
THE USE OF THE LABEL ITSELF IS
VOLUNTARY.
AND THERE IS NO REQUIREMENT THAT
A PACKAGE CONTAINING GLUTEN
EXPRESSLY SAY SO.
AND THE NATIONAL DEBATE ABOUT
MARIJUANA USE PLAYED OUT THIS
WEEKEND IN THE NEW YORK TIMES IN
TWO COMPETING ADS.
FOR WHAT'S BELIEVED TO BE THE
FIRST TIME, AMERICA'S NEWSPAPER
OF RECORD PUBLISHED A FULL-PAGE
AD EXTOLLING MARIJUANA'S MEDICAL
BENEFITS.
IT WAS PLACED BY LEAFLY, AN
ORGANIZATION ONE WRITER CALLED
"YELP FOR WEED" BECAUSE IT HELPS
USERS FIND POT DISPENSARIES.
A SEPARATE AD PLACED BY A NUMBER
OF GROUPS, INCLUDING AN
ORGANIZATION KNOWN AS GRASS IS
NOT GREENER, WARNED THAT THE
RELAXATION OF MARIJUANA LAWS
AROUND THE COUNTRY IS CREATING
BUSINESSES SELLING WHAT THEY
CALLED A HIGHLY HABIT-FORMING
PRODUCT.
THIS WEEK, COLORADO BECAME THE
MOST RECENT STATE TO BEGIN
ISSUING DRIVERS LICENSES TO
PEOPLE REGARDLESS OF THEIR
IMMIGRATION STATUS, JOINING
SEVERAL OTHER STATES AND
WASHINGTON DC BY PERMITTING
PEOPLE WHO HAVE TEMPORARY STATUS
AND THOSE WHO ENTERED THE
COUNTRY ILLEGALLY TO DRIVE.
YESTERDAY, I SPOKE WITH IVAN
MORENO OF THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
FROM DENVER.
>> FIRST OF ALL, 10,000 PEOPLE
HAVE ALREADY SIGNED UP FOR THIS,
AND I HAVE GOT TO ASK, WHAT IS
THIS DRIVER'S LICENSE GET YOU,
JUST THE ABILITY TO DRIVE?
>> YES.
IT GETS YOU THE ABILITY TO
DRIVE, ESSENTIALLY AND FOR SOME
OF THE IMMIGRANTS WHO I HAVE
TALKED TO AND THEIR ADVOCATES
THEY ALSO SAY THAT IT GIVES THEM
A CERTAIN PEACE OF MIND SO THAT
WITH THEIR INTERACTS WITH LAW
ENFORCEMENT THEY WILL FEEL A BIT
MORE COMFORTABLE AND A BIT MORE
AT EASE, AND ALSO AGAIN I THINK
IT JUST GOES INTO IMMIGRANTS
FEELING LIKE IT GIVES THEM A
DEGREE OF LEGITIMACY THAT REALLY
A LOT OF THEM PROBABLY WON'T
EVER HAVE WHILE THEY ARE IN THIS
COUNTRY.
>> AND THAT SAME LEVEL OF
LEGITIMACY HAS BE TO BE A SOURCE
OF CONCERN FOR CRITICS, THEY ARE
ILLEGAL IN THE FIRST PLACE WE
ARE ENABLING THEM TO STAY THERE
AND NOW HAVE APPOINTMENTS
WHENEVER THEY SHOW UP TO DMV,
SHOULDN'T WE MEET THEM WITH A
CUSTOM OFFICIAL THERE?
>> WELL, TO THE FIRST PART OF
YOUR STATEMENT, THAT HAS BEEN
PART OF THE ARGUMENT FROM PEOPLE
IS THAT IT WILL, OPPONENT OF
THIS IT WILL ENCOURAGE OR REWARD
ILLEGAL BEHAVIOR.
I HAVEN'T TALKED TO ANYONE WHO
HAS ACTUALLY SAID LET'S PUT
FEDERAL AUTHORITIES OUTSIDE OF
THIS DMVs AND ARREST AND DEPORT
THESE PEOPLE BUT I THINK THE
BIGGEST CONCERN IS THAT AGAIN
YOU ARE KIND OF SANCTIONING
ILLEGAL BEHAVIOR IS WHAT CRITICS
OF THIS LAW SAY.
>> SO WHO IS PUSHING FOR THE LAW
IN THE FIRST PLACE AND HOW LONG
HAVE THEY BEEN WORKING ON IT?
>> WELL, IT WAS THE DEMOCRATIC
CONTROLLED LEGISLATURE HERE IN
COLORADO AND THE GOVERNOR SIGNED
IT, SO IT WAS SUPPORTED BY
DEMOCRATS AND ACTUALLY LAST YEAR
WAS THE FIRST YEAR THAT IT WAS
INTRODUCED HERE.
COLORADO IS PART OF THIS WAVE OF
STATES THAT PASSED THIS LAW.
YOU MENTIONED THAT IT WAS -- IT
IS 11 STATES THAT HAVE IT, BUT
MOST OF THOSE WERE LAST YEAR,
EIGHT TO BE EXACT.
SO THIS IS REALLY SOMETHING THAT
I THINKABLE, TO BE PERFECTLY
BLUNT KIND OF CAME OUT OF
NOWHERE LAST YEAR AND I THINK IT
GREW OUT OF SOME FRUSTRATION
THAT, YOU KNOW, CONGRESS'S
INABILITY TO PASS ANY SORT OF
COMPREHENSIVE IMMIGRATION
REFORM.
>> SO WHO IS PAYING FOR THIS
PROGRAM?
>> WELL, THE PROGRAM IS INTENDED
TO BE SUSTAINED BY USER FEES, SO
THE PEOPLE WHO ARE APPLYING FOR
THESE LICENSES AND
IDENTIFICATION CARDS ARE PAYING
FOR THOSE -- FOR THESE SERVICES
THEMSELVES AND FOR THAT REASON
THE DRIVER'S LICENSES AND THE
IDS ARE MUCH HIGHER THAN WHAT
THE REST OF THE GENERAL
POPULATION PAYS BY ABOUT DOUBLE
THE AMOUNT THAT PEOPLE USUALLY
PAY, SO THERE IS NO STATE
FUNDING GOING TO SUPPORT THIS
PROGRAM.
IT IS ALL USER FEES.
>> ARE THERE SAFEGUARDS IN PLACE
SO THAT THERE ARE NO OTHER
SERVICES THAT CAN BE ACCESSED
WITH A DRIVER'S LICENSE NOW?
>> THERE ARE.
IN COLORADO THESE LICENSES AND
IDENTIFICATION CARDS ARE CLEARLY
MARKED TO SAY THAT THEY CAN'T BE
USED FOR VOTING, THEY CAN'T BE
USED TO ACCESS FEDERAL BENEFITS
AND THE IDEA TOO IS THAT YOU
CAN'T TAKE YOUR DRIVER'S LICENSE
OR ID CARD TO THE AIRPORT AND
BOARD A PLANE.
>> ALL RIGHT.
IVAN MORENO OF THE ASSOCIATED
PRESS JOINING US FROM DENVER.
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>>
>> Sreenivasan: RETURNING NOW TO
THE CONFLICT IN THE MIDDLE EAST.
TEMPORARY CEASE-FIRES HAVE COME
AND GONE BETWEEN ISRAEL AND
HAMAS, BUT THE ONLINE BATTLE
BETWEEN THE TWO SIDES HAS BEEN
FOUGHT NON-STOP.
NEWSHOUR'S P.J. TOBIA HAS OUR
STORY.
(explosion)
>> Reporter: AS FIGHTING IN GAZA
MOVES INTO A FIFTH WEEK, A
PARALLEL BATTLE IS TAKING PLACE
ON A DIFFERENT FRONT WAGED
ONLINE THROUGH SOCIAL MEDIA.
BOTH HAMAS AND ISRAEL ARE
SEEKING TO CONTROL THE MESSAGE
BEHIND THE FIGHTING, AND ARE
TAKING TO TWITTER, FACEBOOK AND
OTHER ONLINE PLATFORMS TO
INFLUENCE THE PUBLIC'S
PERCEPTION.
>> IT IS A COMPETITION FOR
LIKES, RECOMMENDS, TWEETS,
RETWEETS.
>> Reporter: ADEL ISKANDAR IS A
PROFESSOR OF GLOBAL
COMMUNICATIONS AT SIMON FRASER
UNIVERSITY IN VANCOUVER.
HE SAYS BOTH SIDES OF THE
CONFLICT ARE PURSUING SIMILAR
OBJECTIVES WITH ONLINE CONTENT.
>> THEY REALIZE THAT THEIR
FOOTPRINT CAN BE MUCH WIDER, AND
THEY CAN REACH SORT OF THE DEEP
CREVICES AND FAR-OUT PLACES IN
ONLINE IF THEY'RE ABLE TO BUILD
PLATFORMS THAT ARE SOLELY THEIR
OWN, THAT THEY CAN CONTROL
EXCLUSIVELY AND SEND THEIR
MESSAGES OUT.
>> Reporter: ISKANDAR POINTS TO
FACEBOOK PAGES CREATED BY HAMAS
AND ISRAEL.
>> SO PAGES DEDICATED TO THIS
PARTICULAR CONFLICT, OR IN THE
CASE OF THE ISRAELI DEFENSE
FORCES, THE OPERATION ITSELF, OR
SPECIFIC ASPECTS OF THE
OPERATION, SPECIFIC
SPOKESPERSONS' OFFICES THAT
DERIVE FROM THE ISRAELI DEFENSE
FORCES.
THE SAME GOES WITH HAMAS.
HAMAS HAS A VERY, VERY
INTEGRATED SYSTEM,
COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM, NOT JUST
IN TERMS OF A SATELLITE NETWORK
WHICH BROADCASTS 24 HOURS A DAY,
BUT THEY ALSO HAVE FACEBOOK
PAGES, DEDICATED FACEBOOK PAGES,
FOR EACH OF THEIR BRIGADES AS
WELL.
>> Reporter: EARLIER THIS WEEK,
THE HEADQUARTERS OF HAMAS-RUN
AL-AQSA SATELLITE TV NETWORK WAS
HIT BY ISRAELI AIRSTRIKES.
ISRAEL DEFENSE FORCES POSTED
VIDEO OF THE STRIKE SOON AFTER.
THROUGHOUT THE CONFLICT, IDF'S
TWITTER FEED HAS FEATURED A
NUMBER OF PHOTOS AND VIDEOS
TAKEN DURING ISRAELI MILITARY
OPERATIONS.
THE PAGE HAS MORE THAN 350,000
FOLLOWERS.
RECENT UPLOADS INCLUDE A CLIP
SHOWING THE DESTRUCTION OF
HAMAS' NETWORK OF UNDERGROUND
TUNNELS.
ANOTHER VIDEO CLAIMS TO SHOW
SOLDIERS UNCOVERING HIDDEN
ROCKET LAUNCHERS IN GAZA.
HAMAS' TWITTER PAGE IN ARABIC
HAS MORE THAN 80,000 FOLLOWERS.
MANY TWEETS LINK TO ARTICLES AND
RELEASES FROM ITS INFORMATION
OFFICE.
HAMAS' MILITARY WING HAS ALSO
RELEASED VIDEOS ONLINE OF ITS
EFFORTS IN GAZA.
THE RECORDINGS HAVE SHOWN ARMED
FIGHTERS WINDING THEIR WAY
THROUGH ELABORATE UNDERGROUND
PASSAGEWAYS.
ANOTHER SHOWED MILITANTS
EMERGING FROM ONE TUNNEL TO
ATTACK AN ISRAELI BORDER
OUTPOST.
HAMAS' ENGLISH LANGUAGE TWITTER
ACCOUNT HAS BEEN SUSPENDED.
THEY'VE ALSO POSTED TAUNTING
VIDEOS IN HEBREW ON YOUTUBE BUT
THEY'VE BEEN REMOVED BY THE
COMPANY UNDER ITS HATE SPEECH
POLICY.
ISKANDAR SAYS THE GOAL WITH
SOCIAL MEDIA CAMPAIGNS SHOULDN'T
BE QUANTITY, BUT TRACTION.
>> IF YOU HAVE A SINGLE POSTING
FROM AN IDF PAGE, OR A HAMAS
PAGE, IF IT DOESN'T GET ANY MORE
THAN 200, 300 LIKES, IT PROBABLY
IS... IT'S HAD LITTLE TO NO
IMPACT WHATSOEVER, AND HASN'T
CIRCULATED
IF IT GETS RETWEETED BY SOMEONE
WHO HAS 20,000 OR 100,000
FOLLOWERS, THEN ALL OF A SUDDEN
YOUR MESSAGE HAS BEEN AMPLIFIED.
IF YOU CAN'T AMPLIFY YOUR
MESSAGE, THEN YOU HAVE LITTLE TO
NO IMPACT IN THE 21ST CENTURY,
>> Reporter: THOSE RETWEETS AND
SHARES MAY BE MORE IMPORTANT
THAN THE ORIGINAL MESSAGES
CREATED BY THE ISRAELI
GOVERNMENT AND HAMAS.
>> THERE'S A CONTEST FOR WORLD
OPINION ON, ON NUMEROUS LEVELS.
CERTAINLY, THE GOVERNMENTS ARE
WAGING THAT CONTEST.
>> Reporter: PHILIP SEIB IS VICE
DEAN AND PROFESSOR AT THE U.S.C.
ANNENBERG SCHOOL OF
COMMUNICATION AND JOURNALISM.
I SPOKE WITH HIM VIA SKYPE.
>> SOCIAL MEDIA PROVIDE A VERY
COMFORTABLE HOME FOR UNOFFICIAL
VOICES.
AND ALSO VOICES THAT TEND TO BE
MORE TRUSTED BY THE AUDIENCE.
I'M NOT REALLY CONCERNED WITH
WHAT HAMAS AND THE GOVERNMENT OF
ISRAEL SAY, BUT I AM CONCERNED
ABOUT WHAT MY FRIENDS SAY-- MY
FRIENDS IN THE ARAB WORLD, MY
FRIENDS WHO LIVE IN ISRAEL.
>> Reporter: HE SAYS THE REAL
TEST OF THESE ANTAGONISTS'
SOCIAL MEDIA STRATEGIES MIGHT BE
HOW MUCH OFFLINE ACTION THEY
CREATE.
>> WHAT WE STILL DON'T KNOW IS
THE EXTENT TO WHICH GETTING
INFORMATION ON SOCIAL MEDIA
TRANSLATES INTO POLITICAL
PARTICIPATION.
IN OTHER WORDS, ARE PEOPLE WHO
ARE HEARING THINGS ON SOCIAL
MEDIA WRITING TO THEIR MEMBERS
OF CONGRESS SAYING GIVE ISRAEL
MORE AID OR CUT OFF AID TO
ISRAEL.
>> Reporter: IN THE MEANTIME,
THE ONLINE WAR OF WORDS BURNS
HOTTER BY THE DAY.
>> SEE WHAT VIEWERS THINK ABOUT
THE ROLE OF SOCIAL MEDIA IN
TIMES OF CONFLICT.
VISIT OUR TWITTER CHAT ONLINE AT
NEWSHOUR.PBS.ORG.
>> Sreenivasan: LAST MONTH IN
ATLANTA, 39 COMPETITORS TOOK
PART IN THE FIRST EVER NATIONAL
PARACLIMBING CHAMPIONSHIPS
SPONSORED BY USA CLIMBING, THE
GOVERNING BODY OF COMPETITIVE
CLIMBING IN THE UNITED STATES.
WE VISITED WITH SOME OF THE
ATHLETES IN BROOKLYN AS THEY
TRAINED FOR THE EVENT.
>> HE LOST THE USE OF HIS LEGS
AFTER A BIKING ACCIDENT IN 2008.
HE SPENT MOST OF HIS DAY IN A
WHEELCHAIR, BUT AS A MEMBER OF
THE ADAPTIVE CLIMBING GROUP HE
HAS FOUND A WAY TO LEAVE HIS
CHAIR BEHIND.
>> AND IT IS PHYSICAL AND IT IS
KIND OF BREAKS DOWN THE FACT
THAT YOU ARE DISABLED IF YOU
ABLE TO BE A ROCK CLIMBER AND DO
IT.
>> ADAPTIVE CLIMBING GROUP
BRINGS CLIMBERS WITH MENTAL AND
PHYSICAL DISABILITIES TOGETHER
TO CHALLENGE THEMSELVES AND EACH
OTHER.
>> WE PUSH EACH OTHER A LOT.
MAYBE TOO MUCH, YOU KNOW, WE ARE
REALLY HARD ON EACH OTHER, IT IS
LIKE YOU CAN DO IT.
>> KAREEMAH FOUNDED THE GROUP
TWO YEARS AGO, SHE LOST PART OF
HER LEFT LEG TO CANCER.
>> YOU BECOME UNSATISFIED WITH
THE ASPECTS OF YOUR LIFE, FROM
ANYTHING FROM WALKING TO HOW YOU
USED TO MAKE THE BED OR HOW YOU
USE TO SWEEP THE FLOOR.
I CHOSE CLIMBING BECAUSE I HAD
REACHED A PLATEAU IN MY
RECOVERY, ROCK CLIMBING WAS ONE
OF THE ONLY SPORTS I HAD NEVER
DONE BEFORE SO I SAID THAT IS A
GOOD ONE.
I AM GOING TO PICK THAT ONE,
BECAUSE IF I CAN DO THAT I HAVE
NO MORE EXCUSES.
ALL OF THE DEVICES ARE ON THE
GROUND AND IT IS JUST YOU AND
THAT WALL.
I DON'T THINK I AM THE BEST
CLIMBER OUT THERE.
I AM GOING TO MEET AWESOME
CLIMBERS WHO, LIKE ME, WANT TO
HAVE FUN AND WANT TO CHANNEL
THEMSELVES.
AND GREAT SOCIAL, BREAK SOCIAL
BARRIERS AROUND BEING DISABLED.
AND JUST KICKING SOME ASS IN
ROCK CLIMBING.
>> ARROYO DID JUST THAT,
WINNING A STILL VERY MEDAL IN
ATLANTA, THEY WON FIVE MEDALS
OVERALL.
>> Sreenivasan: SOME LATE NEWS
BEFORE WE LEAVE YOU TONIGHT, IN
A WIDE RANGING INTERVIEW WITH
THE ECONOMIST MAGAZINE PRESIDENT
OBAMA SLAMMED RUSSIA AS A
COUNTRY "THAT DOESN'T MAKE
ANYTHING" AND SAID SIMPLE
APPEALS TO INTERNATIONAL NORMS
ARE INSUFFICIENT IN DEALING
WITH CHINA.
IN CHINA, AN EARTHQUAKE HAS
KILLED AT LEAST 367 PEOPLE
AND DESTROYED SOME 12,000 HOMES.
VISIT US ONLINE AT
NEWSHOUR.PBS.ORG FOR MY
CONVERSATION WITH TWO SCIENTISTS
ABOUT THE ALGAE BLOOM IN LAKE
ERIE THAT LEFT HUNDREDS OF
THOUSANDS IN TOLEDO OHIO WITHOUT
DRINKABLE TAP WATER AND DON'T
FORGET TO JOIN US ON AIR AND
ONLINE ON THE NEWSHOUR.
I AM HARI SREENIVASAN, THANKS
FOR WATCHING.